Happy songs

Nothing lifts the spirits like a good song. It’s truly what music is meant to do. Sure, not all tunes are necessarily meant to put you in a better mood - some are meant to piss you off, or offer an empathetic voice in times of sorrow. What music really, truly does better than any other artistic medium, though, is act as a dose of serotonin for the soul. No matter what’s going on in your life, hearing the right song at the right time can make everything feel better, at least for that moment. 

Of course, a sad song or a mad song can make you feel happy, if it means something to you. But a happy song - one specifically written to put all pain on hold - can penetrate almost any funk. On this list of the best happy songs ever written, you’ll find modern Top 40 bangers, joyful ‘60s and ‘70s soul jams, quirky rock tunes and mellow mood enhancers. There’s even a few hits that, played at the wrong time, might be described as ‘annoying.’ But when you truly need a pick-me-up, all of these songs will instantly brighten your day. 

Faster music tends to induce more positive emotions than slower music. Research suggests that music that is perceived as happy is usually performed at a tempo between 140 and 150 beats per minute (BPM). Songs people have said they use to improve their mood include Queen's Don't Stop Me Now at 156 BPM.

Science has proven that listening to music can boost your mood, reduce anxiety, and improve your overall well-being. Everyone knows that nothing can turn a bad day around like your favorite happy song. So, what are you waiting for?! Press play on this list of the best feel-good songs and get ready to feel instantly happier.

Whether you're recovering from heartbreak, having a stressful day at work (funny country songs can help!), or just feeling like you need some good vibes, listening to happy music will help put a smile on your face. It doesn't matter if you're rocking out with headphones on or blasting tunes from your car stereo, as long as you're moving and grooving to the rhythm.

From classic songs like ABBA's "Dancing Queen" to more modern jams like Taylor Swift's "Shake It Off" and Russell Dickerson's “Good Day To Have A Great Day”—the newest addition to our list just released on May 3, 2024!—all of these popular songs are filled with inspiring lyrics and cheerful beats. This list covers every genre, form pop hits, to funny country sing-a-longs and oldies favorites, so anyone can find a tune here to put a smile on their face. So be warned: After listening to this feel-good playlist, it's going to feel impossible not to smile.

Here's a list of feel-good songs that are known for boosting moods and bringing smiles. These tracks span various genres and eras, ensuring there's something for everyone:

Pharrell Williams - "Happy"
Katrina and The Waves - "Walking on Sunshine"
Bobby McFerrin - "Don't Worry Be Happy"
Queen - "Don't Stop Me Now"
The Beach Boys - "Good Vibrations"
Earth, Wind & Fire - "September"
Mark Ronson ft. Bruno Mars - "Uptown Funk"
Whitney Houston - "I Wanna Dance with Somebody"
Journey - "Don't Stop Believin'"
Andy Grammer - "Keep Your Head Up"
Justin Timberlake - "Can't Stop the Feeling!"
Bill Withers - "Lovely Day"
OutKast - "Hey Ya!"
Taylor Swift - "Shake It Off"
ABBA - "Dancing Queen"
Kool & The Gang - "Celebration"
Stevie Wonder - "Superstition"
Cyndi Lauper - "Girls Just Want to Have Fun"
American Authors - "Best Day of My Life"
Elton John - "Crocodile Rock"
Michael Jackson - "Don't Stop 'Til You Get Enough"
Daft Punk - "Get Lucky"
Bruno Mars - "24K Magic"
The Beatles - "Here Comes the Sun"
Maroon 5 - "Sugar"
Bee Gees - "Stayin' Alive"
The Black Eyed Peas - "I Gotta Feeling"
Aretha Franklin - "Respect"
Gloria Gaynor - "I Will Survive"
The Proclaimers - "I'm Gonna Be (500 Miles)"
Bob Marley - "Three Little Birds"
Fleetwood Mac - "Go Your Own Way"
U2 - "Beautiful Day"
Van Morrison - "Brown Eyed Girl"
James Brown - "I Got You (I Feel Good)"
The Foundations - "Build Me Up Buttercup"
Diana Ross - "Upside Down"
Madness - "Our House"
The Monkees - "I'm a Believer"
Blondie - "Heart of Glass"
David Bowie - "Let's Dance"
The Rolling Stones - "Start Me Up"
Oasis - "Wonderwall"
Hall & Oates - "You Make My Dreams"
The Police - "Every Little Thing She Does Is Magic"
Lionel Richie - "All Night Long"
KC and The Sunshine Band - "Get Down Tonight"
Rick James - "Super Freak"
Smash Mouth - "All Star"
The Jackson 5 - "ABC"
Alphabeat - "Fascination"
Bananarama - "Venus"
Prince - "Raspberry Beret"
Boney M. - "Rasputin"
CeeLo Green - "Forget You"
A-Ha - "Take On Me"
Survivor - "Eye of the Tiger"
Spice Girls - "Wannabe"
Kenny Loggins - "Footloose"
Men at Work - "Down Under"
Dexys Midnight Runners - "Come On Eileen"
Shakira - "Hips Don't Lie"
Coldplay - "Adventure of a Lifetime"
Avicii - "Wake Me Up"
Calvin Harris - "Feel So Close"
Pitbull - "Give Me Everything"
LMFAO - "Party Rock Anthem"
Katy Perry - "Firework"
Pharrell Williams - "Freedom"
S Club 7 - "Reach"
Robbie Williams - "Rock DJ"
The Village People - "Y.M.C.A."
MGMT - "Electric Feel"
Lizzo - "Juice"
Dua Lipa - "Don't Start Now"
Icona Pop - "I Love It"
George Michael - "Freedom! '90"
Chic - "Le Freak"
Tom Petty - "Free Fallin'"
The B-52's - "Love Shack"

This selection of songs includes classics and contemporary hits known for their uplifting and energetic beats. Enjoy the variety and timeless appeal of these feel-good tracks!

Providing general information about every music genre is quite an expansive task, but I can certainly offer a broad overview of some of the most prominent and influential music genres:

General Information of every music genre

Blues: Originating in the Deep South of the United States around the end of the 19th century, blues music is characterized by its use of specific chord progressions and the melodic emphasis on the "blue" notes. It has roots in African American spirituals, work songs, and field hollers.
Jazz: Emerging in the early 20th century in New Orleans, jazz is known for its swing and blue notes, complex chords, and call and response vocals. Jazz has many subgenres, such as big band, bebop, and free jazz, each with distinct characteristics.
Rock: Rock music started in the 1950s and is influenced by blues, R&B, and country music. It is characterized by an emphasis on guitars and drums and includes numerous subgenres like punk rock, heavy metal, and alternative rock.
Pop: Pop music, short for "popular music," is known for its catchy melodies and choruses. It's a commercially recorded music with the goal of appealing to a general audience, often characterized by short to medium-length songs written in a basic format (often the verse-chorus structure).
Classical: Originating in the traditions of Western culture, classical music is noted for its complexity and its adherence to form and composition rules. It spans from medieval times to the present, including everything from Baroque to contemporary periods.
Hip Hop: Hip hop music originated in the 1970s in New York City's Bronx borough. It's defined by rhythmic music that commonly accompanies rapping, a rhythmic and rhyming speech. The genre has expanded globally and includes various forms like gangsta rap and mumble rap.
Country: Country music originated in the Southern United States in the 1920s. It takes its roots from genres such as folk music (especially Appalachian folk) and blues. Country music often consists of ballads and dance tunes with generally simple forms and harmonies accompanied by mostly string instruments such as banjos, electric and acoustic guitars, steel guitars, and fiddles.
Electronic: Electronic music includes a wide range of styles and sounds, primarily made with electronic instruments and technology. Subgenres include dance music, techno, house music, and electronic dance music (EDM).
Reggae: Developed in Jamaica in the late 1960s, reggae is noted for its tradition of social criticism and religion in its lyrics, fused with a unique vocal and rhythmic style of music that reflects the influence of earlier genres such as ska and rocksteady.
Folk: Folk music includes traditional folk music and the genre that evolved from it during the 20th-century folk revival. It has been defined in several ways: as music transmitted by mouth, as music of the lower classes, and as music with unknown composers.

