11th International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR 2010)

MUSIC EMOTION RECOGNITION: A STATE OF THE ART REVIEW
Youngmoo E. Kim, Erik M. Schmidt, Raymond Migneco, Brandon G. Morton
Patrick Richardson, Jeffrey Scott, Jacquelin A. Speck, and Douglas Turnbull†
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Drexel University
Computer Science, Ithaca College†
{ykim, eschmidt, rmigneco, bmorton,
patrickr, jjscott, jspeck}@drexel.edu
turnbull@ithaca.edu†

ABSTRACT

is still in its early stages, though it has received increasing
attention in recent years. Determining the emotional content of music audio computationally is, by nature, a crossdisciplinary endeavor spanning not only signal processing
and machine learning, but also requiring an understanding
of auditory perception, psychology, and music theory.
Computational systems for music mood recognition
may be based upon a model of emotion, although such representations remain an active topic of psychology research.
Categorical and parametric models are supported through
substantial prior research with human subjects, and these
models will be described in further detail in the sections
that follow. Both models are used in Music-IR systems,
but the collection of “ground truth” emotion labels, regardless of the representation being used, remains a particularly
challenging problem. A variety of efforts have been made
towards efficient label collection, spanning a wide range
of potential solutions, such as listener surveys, social tags,
and data collection games. A review of methods for emotion data collection for music is also a subject of this paper.
The annual Music Information Research Evaluation eXchange (MIREX) is a community-based framework for
formally evaluating Music-IR systems and algorithms [2],
which included audio music mood classification as a task
for the first time in 2007 [3]. The highest performing systems in this category demonstrate improvement each year
using solely acoustic features (note that several of the systems were designed for genre classification and then appropriated to the mood classification task, as well). But
emotion is not completely encapsulated within the audio
alone (social context, for example, plays a prominent role),
so approaches incorporating music metadata, such as tags
and lyrics, are also reviewed here in detail.
For this state-of-the-art review of automatic emotion
recognition in music, we first discuss some of the psychological research used in forming models of emotion,
and then detail computational representations for emotion
data. We present a general framework for emotion recognition that is subsequently applied to the different feature
domains. We conclude with an overview of systems that
combine multiple modalities of features.

This paper surveys the state of the art in automatic emotion recognition in music. Music is oftentimes referred
to as a “language of emotion” [1], and it is natural for us
to categorize music in terms of its emotional associations.
Myriad features, such as harmony, timbre, interpretation,
and lyrics affect emotion, and the mood of a piece may
also change over its duration. But in developing automated
systems to organize music in terms of emotional content,
we are faced with a problem that oftentimes lacks a welldefined answer; there may be considerable disagreement
regarding the perception and interpretation of the emotions
of a song or ambiguity within the piece itself. When compared to other music information retrieval tasks (e.g., genre
identification), the identification of musical mood is still in
its early stages, though it has received increasing attention
in recent years. In this paper we explore a wide range of
research in music emotion recognition, particularly focusing on methods that use contextual text information (e.g.,
websites, tags, and lyrics) and content-based approaches,
as well as systems combining multiple feature domains.
1. INTRODUCTION
With the explosion of vast and easily-accessible digital music libraries over the past decade, there has been a rapid
expansion of music information retrieval research towards
automated systems for searching and organizing music and
related data. Some common search and retrieval categories, such as artist or genre, are more easily quantified
to a “correct” (or generally agreed-upon) answer and have
received greater attention in music information retrieval
research. But music itself is the expression of emotions,
which can be highly subjective and difficult to quantify.
Automatic recognition of emotions (or mood) 1 in music
1 Emotion and mood are used interchangeably in the literature and in
this paper.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
c 2010 International Society for Music Information Retrieval.

255

11th International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR 2010)
2. PSYCHOLOGY RESEARCH ON EMOTION

ies by Hevner, published in 1936, initially used 66 adjectives, which were then arranged into 8 groups [10]. While
the adjectives used and their specific grouping and hierarchy have remained scrutinized and even disputed, many
categorical studies conducted since Hevner’s indicate such
tagging can be intuitive and consistent, regardless of the
listener’s musical training [11, 12].
In a recent sequence of music-listening studies Zenter
et al. reduced a set of 801 “general” emotional terms into
a subset metric of 146 terms specific for music mood rating. Their studies, which involved rating music-specificity
of words and testing words in lab and concert settings with
casual and genre-aficionado listeners, revealed that the interpretation of these mood words varies between different
genres of music [13].
The recent MIREX evaluations for automatic music
mood classification have categorized songs into one of five
mood clusters, shown in Table 1. The five categories were
derived by performing clustering on a co-occurrence matrix of mood labels for popular music from the All Music
Guide 2 [3].

Over the past half-century, there have been several important developments spanning multiple approaches for qualifying and quantifying emotions related to music. Such inquiry began well before the widespread availability of music recordings as a means of clinically repeatable musical
stimuli (using musical scores), but recordings are the overwhelmingly dominant form of stimulus used in modern research studies of emotion. Although scores can provide a
wealth of relevant information, score-reading ability is not
universal, and our focus in this section and the overall paper shall be limited to music experienced through audition.
2.1 Perceptual considerations
When performing any measurement of emotion, from direct biophysical indicators to qualitative self-reports, one
must also consider the source of emotion being measured.
Many studies, using categorical or scalar/vector measurements, indicate the important distinction between one’s
perception of the emotion(s) expressed by music and the
emotion(s) induced by music [4,5]. Both the emotional response and its report are subject to confound. Early studies
of psychological response to environment, which consider
the emotional weight of music both as a focal and distracting stimulus, found affective response to music can also be
sensitive to the environment and contexts of listening [6].
Juslin and Luakka, in studying the distinctions between
perceptions and inductions of emotion, have demonstrated
that both can can be subject to not only the social context of
the listening experience (such as audience and venue), but
also personal motivation (i.e., music used for relaxation,
stimulation, etc.) [5]. In the remainder of this paper, we
will focus on systems that attempt to discern the emotion
expressed, rather than induced, by music.

Clusters

Mood Adjectives

Cluster 1

passionate, rousing, confident, boisterous, rowdy
rollicking, cheerful, fun, sweet, amiable/good natured
literate, poignant, wistful, bittersweet,
autumnal, brooding
humorous, silly, campy, quirky, whimsical, witty, wry
aggressive, fiery, tense/anxious, intense,
volatile, visceral

Cluster 2
Cluster 3
Cluster 4
Cluster 5

Table 1. Mood adjectives used in the MIREX Audio Mood
Classification task [3].

2.2 Perception of emotion across cultures
Cross-cultural studies of musical power suggest that there
may be universal psychophysical and emotional cues that
transcend language and acculturation [7]. Comparisons of
tonal characteristics between Western 12-tone and Indian
24-tone music suggest certain universal mood-targeted
melodic cues [8]. In a recent ethnomusicology study of
people with no exposure to Western music (or culture),
Mafa natives of Cameroon, categorized music examples
into three categories of emotion in the same way as Westerners [9].

2.3.2 Scalar/dimensional psychometrics
Other research suggests that mood can be scaled and
measured by a continuum of descriptors or simple multidimensional metrics. Seminal work by Russell and Thayer
in studying dimensions of arousal established a foundation upon which sets of mood descriptors may be organized into low-dimensional models. Most noted is the twodimensional Valence-Arousal (V-A) space (See Figure 1),
where emotions exist on a plane along independent axes
of arousal (intensity), ranging high-to-low, and valence (an
appraisal of polarity), ranging positive-to-negative [4]. The
validity of this two-dimensional representation of emotions
for a wide range of music has been confirmed in multiple
studies [11, 14].
Some studies have expanded this approach to develop
three-dimensional spatial metrics for comparative analysis of musical excerpts, although the semantic nature of
the third dimension is subject to speculation and disagreement [17]. Other investigations of the V-A model itself

2.3 Representations of emotion
Music-IR systems tend to use either categorical descriptions or parametric models of emotion for classification or
recognition. Each representation is supported by a large
body of supporting psychology research.
2.3.1 Categorical psychometrics
Categorical approaches involve finding and organizing
some set of emotional descriptors (tags) based on their relevance to some music in question. One of the earliest stud-

2 All Music Guide: http://www.allmusic.com

256

11th International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR 2010)
Representation

Modeling

Direct Human Annotation
(Survey, Social Tags, Games)
Training Data

TF/IDF,
Dimensionality Reduction,
POS Tagging,
Sentiment Analysis

Indirect Human Annotation
(Web Documents, Social Tag
Cloud, Lyrics)

Supervised
Learning
(e.g., Naive Bayes,
SVM, GMM)

Content-Based Analysis

Feature Extraction,
Dimensionality Reduction

(Audio, Images, Videos)

Vector or
Time-Series of
Vectors
over a Semantic
Space of
Emotion
Each Dimension
Represents an
Emotion

Figure 2. Overall model of emotion classification systems.
a semantic space of emotions. That is, each dimension
of a vector represents a single emotion (e.g., angry) or
a bi-polar pair of emotions (e.g., positive/negative). The
value of a dimension encodes the strength-of-semanticassociation between the piece and the emotion. This is
sometimes represented with a binary label to denote the
presence or absence of the emotion, but more often represented as a real-valued score (e.g., Likert scale value,
probability estimate). We will represent emotion as a timeseries of vectors if, for example, we are attempting to track
changes in emotional content over the duration of a piece.
We can estimate values of the emotion vector for a music piece in a number of ways using various forms of data.
First, we can ask human listeners to evaluate the relevance
of an emotion for a piece (see Section 4). This can be done,
for example, using a survey, a social tagging mechanism,
or an annotation game. We can also analyze forms of contextual meta-data in text form (see Section 5). This may include text-mining web-documents (e.g., artist biographies,
album reviews) or a large collection of social tags (referred
to as a tag cloud), and analyzing lyrics using natural language processing (e.g., sentiment analysis). We can also
analyze the audio content using both signal processing and
supervised machine learning to automatically annotate music pieces with emotions (see Section 6). Content-based
methods can also be used to analyze other related forms
of multimedia data such as music videos and promotional
photographs [21]. Furthermore, multiple data sources, for
example lyrics and audio, may be combined to determine
the emotional content of music (see Section 7).

Arousal
alarmed
angry
annoyed
fustrated

astonished
aroused
delighted
glad

Valence

happy
miserable

pleased

Tension?
Kinetics?
Dominance?
bored

tired

Valence

content
satisfied
calm

Figure 1. The Valence-Arousal space, labeled by Russell’s
direct circular projection of adjectives [4]. Includes semantic of projected third affect dimensions: “tension” [15],
“kinetics” [16], “dominance” [6].
suggest evidence for separate channels of arousal (as originally proposed by Thayer) that are not elements of valence [18].
A related, but categorical, assessment tool for selfreported affect is the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS), which asserts that all discrete emotions (and
their associated labels) exist as incidences of positive or
negative affect, similar to valence [19, 20]. In this case,
however, positive and negative are treated as separate categories as opposed to the parametric approach of V-A.

4. HUMAN ANNOTATION
3. FRAMEWORK FOR EMOTION RECOGNITION

A survey is a straightforward technique for collecting information about emotional content in music. All Music
Guide has devoted considerable amounts of money, time
and human resources to annotate their music databases
with high-quality emotion tags. As such, they are unlikely
to fully share this data with the Music-IR research community. To remedy this problem, Turnbull et al. collected the
CAL500 data set of annotated music [22]. This data set
contains one song from 500 unique artists each of which

Emotion recognition can be viewed as a multiclassmultilabel classification or regression problem where we
try to annotate each music piece with a set of emotions. A
music piece might be an entire song, a section of a song
(e.g., chorus, verse), a fixed-length clip (e.g., 30-second
song snipet), or a short-term segment (e.g., 1 second).
We will attempt to represent mood as either a single
multi-dimensional vector or a time-series of vectors over

257

11th International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR 2010)
have been manually annotated by a minimum of three nonexpert reviewers using a vocabulary of 174 tags, of which
18 relate to different emotions. Trohidis et al. have also
created a publicly available data set consisting of 593 songs
each of which have been annotated using 6 emotions by 3
expert listeners [23].
A second approach to directly collect emotion annotations from human listeners involves social tagging. For example, Last.fm 3 is a music discovery website that allows
users to contribute social tags through a text box in their
audio player interface. By the beginning of 2007, their
large base of 20 million monthly users have built up an unstructured vocabulary of 960,000 free-text tags and used it
to annotate millions of songs [24]. Unlike AMG, Last.fm
makes much of this data available to the public through
their public APIs. While this data is a useful resource for
the Music-IR community, Lamere and Celma point out that
there are a number of problems with social tags: sparsity
due to the cold-start problem and popularity bias, ad-hoc
labeling techniques, multiple spellings of tags, malicious
tagging, etc. [25]

[30, 31]. In this game, players position their cursor within
the V-A space while competing (and collaborating) with
a partner player to annotate 30-second music clips where
scoring is determined by the overlap between players’ cursors (encouraging consensus and discouraging nonsense
labels). Using a similar parametric representation, Bachorik et al. concluded that most music listeners require
8 seconds to evaluate the mood of a song, a delay that
should be considered when collecting such time-varying
annotations [32]. Herd It combines multiple types of music
annotation games, including valence-arousal annotation of
clips, descriptive labeling, and music trivia [33].

4.1 Annotation Games

5.1 Web-Documents

Traditional methods of data collection, such as the hiring
of subjects, can be flawed, since labeling tasks are timeconsuming, tedious, and expensive [26]. Recently, a significant amount of attention has been placed on the use of
collaborative online games to collect such ground truth labels for difficult problems, so-called “Games With a Purpose”. Several such games have been been proposed for
the collection of music data, such as MajorMiner [27],
Listen Game [28], and TagATune [29]. These implementations have primarily focused on the collection of descriptive labels for a relatively short audio clip. Screenshots of
a few, select games are shown in Figure 3.

Artist biographies, album reviews, and song reviews are
rich sources of information about music. There are a number of research-based Music-IR systems that collect such
documents from the Internet by querying search engines
[34], monitoring MP3 blogs [35], or crawling a music website [36]. In all cases, Levy and Sandler point out that such
web mined corpora can be noisy since some of the retrieved
webpages will be irrelevant, and in addition, much of the
text content on relevant webpages will be useless [37].
Most of the proposed web mining systems use a set
of one or more documents associated with a song and
convert them into a single document vector (e.g., Term
Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) representation) [38,39]. This vector space representation is then
useful for a number of Music-IR tasks such as calculating music similarity [39] and indexing content for a textbased music retrieval system [38]. More recently, Knees
et al. have proposed a promising new web mining technique called relevance scoring as an alternative to the vector space approaches [34].

5. CONTEXTUAL TEXT INFORMATION
In this section, we discuss web documents, social tag
clouds and lyrics as forms of textual information that can
be analyzed in order to derive an emotional representation of music. Analysis of these data sources involves using techniques from both text-mining and natural language
processing.

5.2 Social Tags
Social tags have been used to accomplish such Music-IR
tasks as genre and artist classification [40] as well as assessment of musical mood. Some tags such as “happy” and
“sad” are clearly useful for emotion recognition and can be
applied directly in information retrieval systems. Research
has also shown that other tags, such as those related to
genre and instrumentation, can also be useful for this task.
Using ground truth mood labels from AMG, Bischoff et al.
used social tag features from Last.fm to perform emotion
classification based on MIREX mood categories as well
as the V-A model [41]. They experimented with SVM,
Logistic Regression, Random Forest, GMM, K-NN, Decision Trees, and Naive Bayes Multinomial classifiers, with

Figure 3. Examples of “Games With A Purpose” for
ground truth data collection of musical data. Top left:
TagATune. Right: MoodSwings. Bottom left: Herd It.
MoodSwings is another game for online collaborative
annotation of emotions based on the arousal-valence model
3 Last.fm: http://www.last.fm

258

11th International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR 2010)
5.3 Emotion recognition from lyrics

the Naive Bayes Multinomial classifier outperforming all
other methods.

In comparison to tag-based approaches, relatively little research has pursued the use of lyrics as the sole feature
for emotion recognition (although lyrics have been used
as features for artist similarity determination [44]). Lyricbased approaches are particularly difficult because feature
extraction and schemes for emotional labeling of lyrics are
non-trivial, especially when considering the complexities
involved with disambiguating affect from text. Lyrics have
also been used in combination with other features, work
that is detailed in Section 7.

Other research involving the analysis of social tags has
focused on clustering tags into distinct emotions and validating psychometric models. Making each tag a unique
class would yield an unmanageable number of dimensions
and fails to take into account the similarity of many terms
used to describe musical moods. For example, the terms
“bright”, “joyful”, “merry” and “cheerful” describe similar variants of happiness. Similarly, the tokens “gloomy”,
“mournful”, “melancholy” and “depressing” are all related
to sadness [10]. Recent efforts have demonstrated that favorable classification results can be obtained by grouping
like descriptors into similarity clusters [14].

5.3.1 Lyrics feature selection
Establishing “ground-truth” labels describing the emotion
of interconnected words is a significant challenge in lyricbased emotion recognition tasks. Mehrabian and Thayer
proposed that environmental stimuli are linked to behavioral responses by emotional responses described by pleasure (valence), arousal and dominance (PAD) [6]. To this
end, Bradley developed the Affective Norms for English
Words (ANEW), which consists of a large set of words labeled with PAD values. A large number of subjects were
used to label the words by indicating how the word made
them feel in terms of relative happiness, excitement and situational control, which correspond to the pleasure, arousal
and dominance dimensions, respectively. A distribution
of the pleasure and arousal labels for words in ANEW
show that they are well-distributed according to the V-A
model [45]. Hu et al. used Bradley’s ANEW to develop
a translation called Affective Norms for Chinese Words
(ANCW), operating under the assumption that the translated words carry the same affective meaning as their English counterparts [46].
Such affective dictionaries do not take into account
multi-word structure. For lyrics features, most approaches
employ a Bag of Words (BOW) approach, accounting for
frequency of word usage across the corpus (e.g., TF-IDF),
but not the specific order of words. One initial approach
by Chen et al. utilized vector space model (VSM) features that consisted of all the words comprising the lyric
[47]. However, more recently Xia et al. refined the feature vectors by only including sentiment and sentimentrelated words, which they refer to as a sentiment-VSM (sVSM) [48]. The focus on sentiment-related words is intended to capture the effect of modifying terms strengthening or weakening the primary sentiments of the lyrics
and further reduces feature dimensionality.

A number of approaches exist to arrange tags together
into homogeneous groups. Manual clustering involves
grouping of tags into pre-established mood categories, but
given the size and variety of existing tag databases, this approach is not scalable. A straightforward automated clustering method, derived from the TF-IDF metric used often
in text mining, looks for co-occurrences within the mood
tags and forms clusters until no more co-occurrences are
present. The co-occurrence method compares a threshold
to the ratio of the number of songs associated with two tags
to the minimum number of songs associated with either individual tag [42].
Another established method for automatically clustering labels is Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA), a natural language processing technique that reduces a termdocument matrix to a lower rank approximation [43]. The
term-document matrix in this case is a sparse matrix which
describes the number of times each song is tagged with a
given label. For a data set with several thousand songs and
over 100 possible mood tags, the term-document matrix
generated will have very high dimensionality. After some
modifications, performing a singular value decomposition
(SVD) on the modified term-document matrix yields the
left and right singular vectors that represent the distance
between terms and documents respectively. Initial work
by Levy and Sandler applied a variation called Correspondence Analysis to a collection of Last.fm social tags to derive a semantic space for over 24,000 unique tags spanning
5700 tracks.
Tags can also be grouped by computing the cosine
distance between each tag vector and using an unsupervised clustering method, such as Expectation Maximization (EM), to combine terms. In recent work, Laurier et
al., using a cost function to minimize the number of clusters to best represent over 400,000 unique tags, found that
just four clusters yielded optimal clustering of the mood
space [14]. The resulting clusters are somewhat aligned
with Russell and Thayer’s V-A model. Furthermore, both
Levy & Sandler and Laurier et al. demonstrate that application of a self organizing map (SOM) algorithm to their
derived semantic mood spaces yields a two-dimensional
representation of mood consistent with the V-A model.

5.3.2 Systems for emotion recognition from lyrics
Meyers’ Lyricator system provides an emotional score for
a song based on its lyrical content for the purpose of moodbased music exploration [49]. Feature extraction for Lyricator consists of obtaining PAD labels for the words comprising a songs lyric. Songs receive an overall emotional
score in one of the four quadrants of the P-A model based
on a summation of the PAD values for all the words in the
lyric. While this approach is straightforward, it is not a
machine learning system, nor does it make use of natural

259

11th International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR 2010)
language processing (NLP) to disambiguate emotion from
lyrics.
Vector space approaches by Xia and Chen utilize support vector machine (SVM) classifiers for training and
testing data [47, 48]. Xia’s corpus consists of 2600 Chinese pop songs, 60% of which are hand-labeled as “lighthearted” and the remainder labeled as “heavy-hearted”.
Their sentiment-VSM feature set scores above 73% in
terms of precision, recall, and F-1 measure.
Hu et al. utilize a fuzzy clustering technique to determine the main emotion from a lyric. The clusters are
then weighted using grammatical information, which specify confidence and weights for individual sentences based
on factors such as tense and inter-sentence relationships.
The cluster with the greatest overall weight is considered
the main emotion of the song and is characterized by its
mean V-A values into one of the four quadrants of the VA model. They demonstrate that their system outperforms
the baseline Lyricator system in multiple categories [46].
Y. Yang explored the use of bi-gram BOW features, using pairs of words to examine the effects of negation terms
(e.g., “not happy” differs from “happy”) and Probabilistic
LSA (PLSA) to model song topics using word frequencies [50]. Bi-gram BOW features demonstrated negligible
increases in classification valence, but PLSA proved to be
much more robust to a reduction of training set size.

Type

Features

Dynamics
Timbre

RMS energy
MFCCs, spectral shape, spectral contrast
Roughness, harmonic change, key clarity, majorness
Chromagram, chroma centroid and deviation
Rhythm strength, regularity, tempo, beat
histograms
Event density, attack slope, attack time

Harmony
Register
Rhythm
Articulation

Table 2. Common acoustic feature types for emotion classification.
tial feature selection (SFS), followed by principal component analysis (PCA) on the subset to identify and remove
redundant feature dimensions. The focus of their research,
however, was monophonic instrument classification across
nine classes spanning emotion and expression, as opposed
to musical mixtures. Of the 17 tested features the most
informative overall were found to be roughness, notes per
second, attack time, and peak sound level.
MacDorman et al. examined the ability of multiple
acoustic features (sonogram, spectral histogram, periodicity histogram, fluctuation pattern, and mel-frequency cepstral coefficients–MFCCs [51, 52]) to predict pleasure and
arousal ratings of music excerpts. They found all of these
features to be better at predicting arousal than pleasure, and
the best prediction results when all five features were used
together [53].
Schmidt et al. investigated the use of multiple acoustic feature domains for music clips both in terms of individual performance as well as in combination in a feature
fusion system [54, 55]. Their feature collection consisted
of MFCCs, chroma [56], statistical spectrum descriptors
(including centroid, flux, and rolloff, depicted in Figure 4)
[57], and octave-based spectral contrast [58]. The highest
performing individual features were spectral contrast and
MFCCs, but again the best overall results were achieved
using combinations of features.

6. CONTENT-BASED AUDIO ANALYSIS
Clearly, many human assessments of musical mood are derived from the audio itself (after all, tags are most often
generated by people listening to the music). Contextual information for a music piece may be incomplete or missing
entirely (i.e., for newly composed music). Given the rapid
expansion of digital music libraries, including commercial
databases with millions of songs, it is clear that manual
annotation methods will not efficiently scale. Thus, the appeal of content-based systems is obvious and the recognition of emotions from audio has been a longstanding goal
for the Music-IR research community (the corresponding
MIREX task focused on systems driven by music audio).
6.1 Acoustic Features
Emotions can be influenced by such attributes as tempo,
timbre, harmony, and loudness (to name only a few), and
much prior work in Music-IR has been directed towards the
development of informative acoustic features. Although
some research has focused on searching for the most informative features for emotion classification, no dominant
single feature has emerged. An overview of the most common acoustic features used for mood recognition is given
in Table 2.
In searching for the most informative emotion and expressive features to extract from audio, Mion and De Poli
investigated a system for feature selection and demonstrated it on an initial set of single-dimensional features,
including intensity and spectral shape as well as several
music-theoretic features [16]. Their system used sequen-

Figure 4. Graphical depiction of statistical spectrum descriptors.

260

11th International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR 2010)
with accuracy ranging from 77% (carefree-playful) to 91%
(calming-soothing), depending on the category [62].
As mentioned in the introduction, MIREX first included
audio music mood classification as a task in 2007 [3]. In
2007, Tzanetakis achieved the highest percentage correct
(61.5%), using only MFCC, and spectral shape, centroid,
and rolloff features with an SVM classifier [63]. The highest performing system in 2008 by Peeters demonstrated
some improvement (63.7%) by introducing a much larger
feature corpus including, MFCCs, Spectral Crest/Spectral
Flatness, as well as a variety of chroma based measurements [64]. The system uses a GMM approach to classification, but first employs Inertia Ratio Maximization with
Feature Space Projection (IRMFSP) to select the most informative 40 features for each task (in this case mood),
and performs Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) for dimensionality reduction. In 2009, Cao and Li submitted a
system that was a top performer in several categories, including mood classification (65.7%) [65]. Their system
employs a “super vector” of low-level acoustic features,
and employs a Gaussian Super Vector followed by Support Vector Machine (GSV-SVM). It’s worth noting that
the best performers in each of the three years of the evaluation were general systems designed to perform multiple
MIREX tasks.

Eerola et al., also the developers of the open-source
feature extraction code, MIRtoolbox, 4 have developed
a specific subset of informative audio features for emotion. These features are aggregated from a wide range
of domains including dynamics, timbre, harmony, register, rhythm, and articulation [15]. Other recent approaches
have adopted a generalized approach to feature extraction, compiling multiple feature sets (resulting in high dimensional spaces) and employing dimensionality reduction techniques [50,59]. Regardless of feature fusion or dimensionality reduction methods, the most successful systems combine multiple acoustic feature types.
6.2 Audio-based systems
Audio content-based methods for emotion recognition use
either a categorical or parametric model of emotion. The
former results in a classification task and the latter in a
regression task, with all recent systems employing one of
these methods.
6.2.1 Categorical emotion classification
In one of the first publications on this topic, Li and Ogihara
used acoustic features related to timbre, rhythm, and pitch
to train support vector machines (SVMs) to classify music
into one of 13 mood categories [60]. Using a hand-labeled
library of 499 music clips (30-seconds each) from a variety of genres spanning ambient, classical, fusion, and jazz,
they achieved an accuracy of 45%.
Lu et al. pursued mood detection and tracking using a
similar variety of acoustic features including intensity, timbre, and rhythm [59]. Their classifier used Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) for the four principal mood quadrants on the V-A representation. The system was trained
using a set of 800 classical music clips (from a data set
of 250 pieces), each 20 seconds in duration, hand labeled
to one of the 4 quadrants. Their system achieved an overall accuracy of 85%, although it is also unclear how the
multiple clips extracted from the same recording were distributed between training and testing sets.
Proposing a guided scheme for music recommendation,
Mandel et al. developed active learning systems, an approach that can provide recommendations based upon any
musical context defined by the user [61]. To perform a
playlist retrieval, the user would present the system with
a set of “seed songs,” or songs representing the class of
playlist desired. The system uses this data, combined with
verification data from the user, to construct a binary SVM
classifier using MFCC features. When tested on 72 distinct moods from AMG labels, the system achieved a peak
performance of 45.2%.
Skowronek et al. developed binary classifiers for each
of 12 non-exclusive mood categories using a data set of
1059 song excerpts. Using features based on temporal
modulation, tempo and rhythm, chroma and key information, and occurrences of percussive sound events they
trained quadratic discriminant functions for each mood,

6.2.2 Parametric emotion regression
Recent work in music emotion prediction from audio has
suggested that parametric regression approaches can outperform labeled classifications using equivalent features.
Targeting the prediction of V-A coordinates from audio,
Yang et al. introduced the use of regression for mapping
high-dimensional acoustic features to the two-dimensional
space [50]. Support vector regression (SVR) [66] and a
variety of ensemble boosting algorithms, including AdaBoost.RT [67], were applied to the regression problem,
and one ground-truth V-A label was collected for each of
195 music clips. As this work focused primarily on labeling and regression techniques, features were extracted
using publicly available extraction tools such as PsySound
[68] and Marsyas [69], totaling 114 feature dimensions.
To reduce the data to a tractable number of dimensions
principal component analysis (PCA) was applied prior to
regression. This system achieves an R2 (coefficient of determination) score of 0.58 for arousal and 0.28 for valence.
Schmidt et al. and Han et al. each began their investigation with a quantized representation of the V-A space
and employed SVMs for classification [54, 70]. Citing unsatisfactory results (with Schmidt obtaining 50.2% on a
four-way classification of V-A quadrants and Han obtaining 33% accuracy in an 11-class problem), both research
teams moved to regression-based approaches. Han reformulated the problem using regression, mapping the projected results into the original mood categories, employing SVR and Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) regression
methods. Using 11 quantized categories with GMM regression they obtain a peak performance of 95% correct
classification.

4 MIRtoolbox: http://www.jyu.fi/hum/laitokset/musiikki/en/research/
coe/materials/mirtoolbox

261

11th International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR 2010)
Eerola et al. introduced the use of a three-dimensional
emotion model for labeling music; fully committing themselves to regression [15]. In their work they investigated
multiple regression approaches including Partial LeastSquares (PLS) regression, an approach that considers correlation between label dimensions. They achieve R2 performance of 0.72, 0.85, and 0.79 for valence, activity, and
tension, respectively, using PLS and also report peak R2
prediction rates for 5 basic emotion classes (angry, scary,
happy, sad, and tender) as ranging from 0.58 to 0.74.
Noting that quantization by quadrant is inconsistent
with the continuous nature of their collected V-A labels,
Schmidt et al. also approached the problem using both
SVR and Multiple Linear Regression (MLR). Their highest performing system obtained 13.7% average error distance in the normalized V-A space [54]. In more recent
work, Schmidt et al. have introduced the idea of modeling
the collected human response labels to music in the V-A
space as a parametrized stochastic distribution, noting that
the labels for most popular music segments of a reasonably small size can be well represented by a single twodimensional Gaussian [55]. They first perform parameter
estimation in order to determine the ground truth parameters, N (µ, Σ) and then employ MLR, PLS, and SVR to
develop parameter prediction models. An example regression is shown in Figure 5, which employs only spectral
contrast features and MLR.

label to refer to an entire song or lengthy clip are subject
to high classification uncertainty. Lu et al. pursued mood
tracking across the four principal V-A quadrants, detecting
mood changes at 1 second resolution. They report precision and recall for mood boundary detection at 84.1% and
81.5%, respectively on a corpus of 9 movements from classical works [59].
Using second-by-second V-A labels collected via the
MoodSwings game, Schmidt et al. also investigated tracking the emotional content of music over time [54, 55].
Their time-varying analyses remain formulated as a regression to develop a mapping from short-time highdimensional acoustic features to time-localized emotion
space coordinates. Figure 6 shows the V-A projections
of a song clip obtained from spectral contrast features and
MLR prediction [54]. In this example, a 15-second clip has
been broken down into three five-second segments (projections) demonstrating the overall movement in the V-A
space. A version of their time-varying regression system
is implemented back into MoodSwings as a simulated “AI”
partner for single-player games.
Emotion Regression Over Time
Collective Soul: Breathe, 34 to 48 seconds
0.5

Emotion Distribution Regression
Cake: She’ll Come Back To Me, 66 to 80 seconds

Arousal

Arousal

0.5

0

0
−0.5
−0.5

−0.5
−0.5

0
Valence

0
Valence

0.5

Figure 6. V-A labels and projections over time for a 15s
segment (markers become darker over time): second-bysecond labels per song (gray •), mean of the collected labels over 5-second intervals (red X), and projection from
acoustic features in 5-second intervals (blue O) [54].

0.5

Figure 5. Collected V-A labels and distribution projections
resulting from regression analysis. V-A labels: secondby-second labels per song (gray •), Σ of labels (solid red
ellipse) and Σ of MLR projection from acoustic features
(dashed blue ellipse) [55].

7. COMBINING MULTIPLE FEATURE DOMAINS
It is clear that some aspects of music data (e.g., social factors, such as “Christmas music”, or songs considered to
be “one hit wonders”) are not revealed in the audio, and
results using only acoustic (spectral) features for MusicIR tasks have led many to believe there is an upper limit
to performance using these features alone [71]. This
has led to a growing amount of research towards combining multiple feature domains to improve recognition
in Music-IR systems. The earliest attempts at classification of emotion using multi-modal approaches (combining
features from disparate domains) were applied to speech,

6.3 Emotion Recognition Over Time
As few other Music-IR tasks are subject to dynamic (time
varying) “ground truth”, it can be argued that accounting
for the time varying nature of music is perhaps more important for emotion recognition than most other tasks. Because of this variation, systems relying on a single mood

262

11th International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR 2010)
the lexical database WordNet-Affect to remove synonyms
(with subsequent validation by human listeners). The corpus consisted of 1000 songs, with equal distribution across
the four quadrants, and a combination of timbral, rhythmic,
tonal, and temporal features were computed for each song.
Three different methods, lyric similarity, LSA, and Language Model Differences (LMD) were investigated for deriving lyrics features. LMD compares the difference in frequency of terms between the language models of various
mood categories and is used here to select the 100 most discriminative terms, resulting in significantly higher classification performance vs. LSA. The audio and text features
were combined into a single vector for joint classification,
improving performance over audio features alone in two
quadrants by 5%: “happy” (81.5% to 86.8%) and “sad”
(87.7% to 92.8%). The other quadrants were essentially
unchanged, but already had high classification accuracy using only audio features: “relaxed” (91.4% to 91.7%) and
“angry” (98.1% to 98.3%).
Hu et al. also combined audio and lyrics for emotion
recognition on a relatively large database of nearly 3000
songs [78]. Eighteen emotion classes were formed based
on social tags from Last.fm, using WordNet-Affect to remove tags irrelevant to emotion recognition and significant
refinement by human judges. For lyrics features, this system uses a BOW approach with TF-IDF weighting. The
BOW stemmed (prefixes and suffixes removed), TF-IDF
weighted (BSTI) features are directly concatenated with 63
spectrum-derived audio features for training an SVM classifier. BSTI features were selected using different methods, including the LMD selection method (described in
the previous system [77]), varying the number of feature
dimensions to identify optimal performance. Interestingly,
using BSTI (lyrics) features alone outperforms audio alone
for 12 of the 18 mood classes. Audio + lyric approaches
demonstrate the highest performance in recognizing 13 of
the 18 mood classes (audio alone is highest for 3 classes,
“happy”, “upbeat”, and “desire”, while lyrics alone perform best for “grief” and “exciting”). Audio with LMD
feature selection (63 dimensions, equivalent to the number
of audio features) performed the highest in 5 categories
(“calm”, “sad”, “anger”, “confident”, and “earnest”) and
improved performance in half of the cases where audio
alone outperforms lyrics and vice versa, demonstrating the
utility of combining features.
Recently, Schuller et al. investigated using audio features, lyrics, and metadata to automatically label music in
a discretized version of the V-A space [79]. For a database
of 2648 pop songs, each was rated by four listeners who
selected one of 5 discrete labels. Their classification task,
is ultimately reduced to two independent three-class problems. Their best performing system made use of feature
selection algorithms and label filtering, achieving 64.1%
and 60.9% on valence and arousal, respectively.

using combined analysis of audio and facial expressions
[72–74]. These methods have inspired other multi-modal
approaches to several other Music-IR classification tasks,
such as genre recognition, but such combined approaches
to classifying the emotional content of music have emerged
only within the past few years.
7.1 Combining Audio & Lyrics
In spite of the importance of audio, some musical genres
(e.g., “Christmas songs”) are much easier to detect using
text. This was the motivation for Neumayer’s work utilizing multiple combinations of audio and textual features
for musical genre classification [75]. Similarly, many of
the studies described below are motivated by the idea that
some emotions conveyed by music are better detected using a combination of audio and lyrics. Some systems report relatively modest performance gains, but it is often
in tasks where baseline performance using audio features
alone has been high. The most compelling results show,
in certain cases, improvement over audio features alone,
demonstrating that information contained within the two
feature modalities can be highly complementary.
7.1.1 Systems combining audio & lyrics
The first system to employ both audio and lyrics for emotion classification (D. Yang and Lee) used lyric text and a
wide range of audio features, such as beats per minute and
12 low-level MPEG-7 descriptors (e.g., spectral centroid,
rolloff, and flux), on a set of 145 30-second song clips [76].
Each clip was hand-labeled with one of 11 emotional categories, based on PANAS labels [19, 20]. While strong correlations were found between particular lyrics and emotional categories (hostility, sadness, and guilt), the addition of lyrics increased classification performance by only
2.1% (82.8% vs. 80.7% using only audio) on their relatively small data set.
A more recent system (Y. Yang et al.) combined lyrics
and audio features using a database of 1240 Chinese pop
songs [50]. The songs were hand-labeled according to
one of the four valence-arousal quadrants of the RussellThayer model, and acoustic features (MFCC and spectral descriptors) were computed for a 30-second segment
drawn from the middle of each song. Lyrics (assumably
from the entire song) were text-analyzed using the BOW
approach. This work compared three different methods
of combining audio and text features, obtaining the best
results by first using audio and text separately to classify
arousal and valence, respectively, using SVMs and then
merging the results to determine a full V-A classification.
On an 80/20 training-testing split of the data with 1000fold cross-validation, acoustic features alone resulted in a
baseline of 46.6% correct classification, while combining
audio and lyrics yielded 57.1% accuracy (a relative performance increase of 21%).
Other recent work by Laurier, Grivolla, and Herrera explored the use of audio and multiple lyrics features to classify emotions of songs in the four-quadrant V-A space [77].
Songs were labeled using Last.fm tags and filtered using

7.2 Combining Audio & Tags
Music-IR researchers have also focused on multimodal approaches incorporating tags and low-level audio features

263

11th International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR 2010)
plied to relatively short musical selections. Oftentimes,
this approach reveals little in terms of the underlying forces
driving the perception of musical emotion (e.g., varying
contributions of features) and, in particular, how emotions
in music change over time. In the future, we anticipate
further collaborations between Music-IR researchers, psychologists, and neuroscientists, which may lead to a greater
understanding of not only mood within music, but human
emotions in general. Furthermore, it is clear that individuals perceive emotions within music differently. Given the
multiple existing approaches for modeling the ambiguities
of musical mood, a truly personalized system would likely
need to incorporate some level of individual profiling to
adjust its predictions.
This paper has provided a broad survey of the state of
the art, highlighting many promising directions for further
research. As attention to this problem increases, it is our
hope that the progress of this research will continue to accelerate in the near future.

for classification tasks. Turnbull et al. explore the problem of tag classification by combining semantic information from web documents, social tags and audio analysis
on the CAL500 data set [80]. They compare a number of
algorithms (e.g., Calibrated Score Averaging, RankBoost,
Kernel Combination SVM) and find that multimodal approaches significantly outperform unimodal approaches.
Bischoff et al. combine social tag information and audio content-based analysis specifically for the task of emotion recognition [41]. For each of 4,737 songs, they collect
social tags from Last.fm and generate a 240-dimensional
audio feature vectors (including MFCCs, chroma features,
and other spectral features). They then train a naive Bayes
classifier for the social tags and an SVM for the audio
feature vectors, combining them using a simple weighted
combination approach. In one experiment, this approach is
used to predict one of the five MIREX mood clusters [3].
In the second experiment, the approach is used to predict
one of the four quadrants of the V-A mood space. Ground
truth for each track is based on a manually-determined
(ad-hoc) mapping between one of 178 mood tags to a
MIREX mood cluster and to a V-A quadrant. In both experiments, the multimodal approach demonstrates better
performance than either the tag-based and audio-based approaches alone.

9. REFERENCES
[1] C. C. Pratt, Music as the language of emotion. The Library
of Congress, December 1950.
[2] J. S. Downie, “The music information retrieval evaluation exchange (2005–2007): A window into music information retrieval research,” Acoustical Science and Technology, vol. 29,
no. 4, pp. 247–255, 2008.

7.3 Combining Audio & Images
Analysis of audio features of music in combination with
associated images (album covers, artist photos, etc.) for
Music-IR tasks has very recently sparked research interest.
Dunker et al. investigated methods to combine music and
image domains for mood classification [81]. Their work
investigates both classifying audio paired with images in
a multi-modal media tagging approach as well as trying
to pair audio and images that have been tagged separately.
More recently, Lı̄beks and Turnbull analyze promotional
photographs of artists using content-based image annotation [21]. Although they label these artists with genre tags
(provided by Last.fm), it would be straightforward to adapt
their approach to use emotion tags.

[3] X. Hu, J. Downie, C. Laurier, M. Bay, and A. Ehmann,
“The 2007 MIREX audio mood classification task: Lessons
learned,” in Proc. of the Intl. Conf. on Music Information Retrieval, Philadelphia, PA, 2008.
[4] J. A. Russell, “A circumspect model of affect,” Journal of
Psychology and Social Psychology, vol. 39, no. 6, p. 1161,
1980.
[5] P. Juslin and P. Luakka, “Expression, perception, and induction of musical emotions: A review and questionnaire
study of everyday listening,” Journal of New Music Research,
vol. 33, no. 3, p. 217, 2004.
[6] A. Mehrabian and J. A. Russell, An Approach to Environmental Psychology. MIT Press, 1974.
[7] C. McKay, “Emotion and music: Inherent responses and the
importance of empirical cross-cultural research,” Course Paper. McGill University, 2002.

8. CONCLUSION
Recognizing musical mood remains a challenging problem
primarily due to the inherent ambiguities of human emotions. Though research on this topic is not as mature as
some other Music-IR tasks, it is clear that rapid progress is
being made. In the past 5 years, the performance of automated systems for music emotion recognition using a wide
range of annotated and content-based features (and multimodal feature combinations) have advanced significantly.
As with many Music-IR tasks open problems remain at
all levels, from emotional representations and annotation
methods to feature selection and machine learning.
While significant advances have been made, the most
accurate systems thus far achieve predictions through
large-scale machine learning algorithms operating on vast
feature sets, sometimes spanning multiple domains, ap-

[8] L.-L. Balkwill and W. F. Thompson, “A cross-cultural investigation of the perception of emotion in music,” Music Perception, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 43–64, 1999.
[9] T. Fritz, S. Jentschke, N. Gosselin, D. Sammler, I. Peretz,
R. Turner, A. D. Friederici, and S. Koelsch, “Universal recognition of three basic emotions in music,” Current Biology,
vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 573 – 576, 2009.
[10] K. Hevner, “Experimental studies of the elements of expression in music,” American Journal of Psychology, vol. 48,
no. 2, pp. 246–267, 1936.
[11] P. Juslin and J. Sloboda, Music and Emotion: theory and research. Oxford Univ. Press, 2001.
[12] E. Schubert, “Update of the Hevner adjective checklist,” Perceptual and Motor Skills, vol. 96, pp. 1117–1122, 2003.

264

11th International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR 2010)
[13] M. Zentner, D. Grandjean, and K. R. Scherer, “Emotions
evoked by the sound of music: Characterization, classification, and measurement.” Emotion, vol. 8, p. 494, 2008.
[14] C. Laurier, M. Sordo, J. Serra, and P. Herrera, “Music mood
representation from social tags,” in Proc. of the Intl. Society
for Music Information Conf., Kobe, Japan, 2009.
[15] T. Eerola, O. Lartillot, and P. Toiviainen, “Prediction of multidimensional emotional ratings in music from audio using
multivariate regression models,” in Proc. of the Intl. Society
for Music Information Conf., Kobe, Japan, 2009.
[16] L. Mion and G. D. Poli, “Score-independent audio features
for description of music expression,” IEEE Transactions on
Audio, Speech and Language Processing, vol. 16, no. 2, pp.
458–466, 2008.
[17] E. Bigand, “Multidimensional scaling of emotional responses
to music: The effect of musical expertise and of the duration
of the excerpts,” Cognition and Emotion, vol. 19, no. 8, p.
1113, 2005.

[31] B. G. Morton, J. A. Speck, E. M. Schmidt, and Y. E. Kim,
“Improving music emotion labeling using human computation,” in HCOMP 2010: Proc. of the ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Human Computation, Washington, D.C., 2010.
[32] J. P. Bachorik, M. Bangert, P. Loui, K. Larke, J. Berger,
R. Rowe, and G. Schlaug, “Emotion in motion: Investigating
the time-course of emotional judgments of musical stimuli,”
Music Perception, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 355–364, April 2009.
[33] L. Barrington, D. Turnbull, D. O’Malley, and G. Lanckriet,
“User-centered design of a social game to tag music,” ACM
KDD Workshop on Human Computation, 2009.
[34] P. Knees, T. Pohle, M. Schedl, D. Schnitzer, and K. Seyerlehner, A Document-Centered Approach to a Natural Language Music Search Engine. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg,
2008, pp. 627–631.
[35] O. Celma, P. Cano, and P. Herrera, “Search sounds: An audio
crawler focused on weblogs,” in Proc. of the Intl. Conf. on
Music Information Retrieval, Victoria, Canada, 2006.

[18] U. Schimmack and R. Reisenzein, “Experiencing activation:
energetic arousal and tense arousal are not mixtures of valence and activation,” Emotion, vol. 2, no. 4, p. 412, 2002.

[36] B. Whitman and D. Ellis, “Automatic record reviews,” in
Proc. of the Intl. Conf. on Music Information Retrieval,
Barcelona, Spain, 2004, pp. 470–477.

[19] D. Watson and L. Clark, PANAS-X: Manual for the Positive
and Negative Affect Schedule, expanded form ed., University
of Iowa, 1994.

[37] M. Levy and M. Sandler, “A semantic space for music derived from social tags,” in Proc. of the Intl. Conf. on Music
Information Retrieval, Vienna, Austria, 2007.

[20] A. Tellegen, D. Watson, and L. A. Clark, “On the dimensional and hierarchical structure of affect,” Psychological
Science, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 297–303, 1999.

[38] P. Knees, T. Pohle, M. Schedl, and G. Widmer, “A music
search engine built upon audio-based and web-based similarity measures,” in ACM SIGIR, 2007.

[21] J. Lı̄beks and D. Turnbull, “Exploring artist image using
content-based analysis of promotional photos,” in Proc. of
the Int. Computer Music Conf., 2010.

[39] B. Whitman, “Combining musical and cultural features for
intelligent style detection,” in Proc. of the Intl. Conf. on Music Information Retrieval, Paris, France, 2002, pp. 47–52.

[22] D. Turnbull, L. Barrington, D. Torres, and G. Lanckriet, “Semantic annotation and retrieval of music and sound effects,”
IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Processing, vol. 16, no. 2, 2008.

[40] P. Knees, E. Pampalk, and G. Widmer, “Artist classification
with web-based data,” in Proc. of the Intl. Symposium on Music Information Retrieval, Barcelona, Spain, 2004, pp. 517–
524.

[23] K. Trohidis, G. Tsoumakas, G. Kalliris, and I. Vlahavas,
“Multilabel classification of music into emotion,” in Proc. of
the Intl. Conf. on Music Information Retrieval, Philadelphia,
PA, 2008.

[41] K. Bischoff, C. S. Firan, R. Paiu, W. Nejdl, C. Laurier, and
M. Sordo, “Music mood and theme classification-a hybrid
approach,” in Proc. of the Intl. Society for Music Information
Retrieval Conf., Kobe, Japan, 2009.

[24] F. Miller, M. Stiksel, and R. Jones, “Last.fm in numbers,”
Last.fm press material, February 2008.

[42] K. Bischoff, C. Firan, W. Nejdl, and R. Paiu, “How do you
feel about ‘Dancing Queen’?: Deriving mood & theme annotations from user tags,” in Proc. of the ACM/IEEE-CS Joint
Conf. on Digital Libraries, Austin, TX, Jan 2009.

[25] P. Lamere and O. Celma, “Music recommendation tutorial
notes,” ISMIR Tutorial, September 2007.
[26] L. von Ahn, “Games with a purpose,” Computer, vol. 39,
no. 6, pp. 92–94, 2006.
[27] M. I. Mandel and D. P. W. Ellis, “A web-based game for collecting music metadata,” in Proc. of the Intl. Conf. on Music
Information Retrieval, Vienna, Austria, 2007, pp. 365–366.
[28] D. Turnbull, R. Liu, L. Barrington, and G. Lanckriet, “A
game-based approach for collecting semantic annotations of
music,” in Proc. Intl. Conf. on Music Information Retrieval,
Vienna, Austria, 2007, pp. 535–538.

[43] S. Deerwester, S. T. Dumais, G. W. Furnas, T. K. Landauer,
and R. Harshman, “Indexing by latent semantic analysis,”
Journal of the American Society for Information Science,
vol. 41, pp. 391–407, 1990.
[44] B. Logan, A. Kositsky, and P. Moreno, “Semantic analysis
of song lyrics,” in Proc. IEEE Intl. Conf. on Multimedia and
Expo, Taipei, Taiwan, June 27-30 2004.
[45] M. M. Bradley and P. J. Lang, “Affective norms for English
words (ANEW),” The NIMH Center for the Study of Emotion and Attention,University of Florida, Tech. Rep., 1999.

[29] E. L. M. Law, L. von Ahn, R. B. Dannenberg, and M. Crawford, “TagATune: A game for music and sound annotation,”
in Proc. of the Intl. Conf. on Music Information Retrieval,
Vienna, Austria, 2007.

[46] Y. Hu, X. Chen, and D. Yang, “Lyric-based song emotion detection with affective lexicon and fuzzy clustering method,”
in Proc. of the Intl. Society for Music Information Conf.,
Kobe, Japan, 2009.

[30] Y. Kim, E. Schmidt, and L. Emelle, “Moodswings: A collaborative game for music mood label collection,” in Proc.
Intl. Conf. on Music Information Retrieval, Philadelphia, PA,
September 2008.

[47] R. H. Chen, Z. L. Xu, Z. X. Zhang, and F. Z. Luo, “Content
based music emotion analysis and recognition,” in Proc. of
the Intl. Workshop on Computer Music and Audio Technology, 2006.

265

11th International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR 2010)
[48] Y. Xia, L. Wang, K. Wong, and M. Xu, “Sentiment vector
space model for lyric-based song sentiment classification,”
in Proc. of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Columbus, Ohio, U.S.A: ACL-08, 2008, pp. 133–136.
[49] O. C. Meyers, “A mood-based music classification and exploration system,” Master’s thesis, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, June 2007.
[50] Y.-H. Yang, Y.-C. Lin, H.-T. Cheng, I.-B. Liao, Y.-C. Ho,
and H. Chen, Advances in Multimedia Information Processing - PCM 2008, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, December 2008, ch. 8, pp. 70–
79.
[51] S. Davis and P. Mermelstein, “Comparison of parametric representations for monosyllabic word recognition in continuously spoken sentences,” IEEE Transactions on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 357– 366,
1980.
[52] B. Logan, “Mel frequency cepstral coefficients for music
modeling,” in Proc. of the Intl. Symposium on Music Information Retrieval, Plymouth, MA, September 2000.
[53] K. F. MacDorman, S. Ough, and C.-C. Ho, “Automatic emotion prediction of song excerpts: Index construction, algorithm design, and empirical comparison,” Journal of New
Music Research, vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 281–299, 2007.
[54] E. M. Schmidt, D. Turnbull, and Y. E. Kim, “Feature selection for content-based, time-varying musical emotion regression,” in MIR ’10: Proc. of the Intl. Conf. on Multimedia
Information Retrieval, Philadelphia, PA, 2010, pp. 267–274.

[65] C. Cao and M. Li, “Thinkit’s submissions for MIREX2009
audio music classification and similarity tasks.” ISMIR,
MIREX 2009.
[66] A. Smola and B. Schölkopf, “A tutorial on support vector regression,” Statistics and Computing, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 199–
222, 2004.
[67] D. Shrestha and D. Solomatine, “Experiments with AdaBoost.RT, an improved boosting scheme for regression,”
Neural Computation, vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 1678–1710, 2006.
[68] D. Cabrera, S. Ferguson, and E. Schubert, “Psysound3: software for acoustical and psychoacoustical analysis of sound
recordings,” in Proc. of the Intl. Conf. on Auditory Display,
Montreal, Canada, June 26-29 2007, pp. 356–363.
[69] G. Tzanetakis and P. Cook, “Marsyas: a framework for audio
analysis,” Organized Sound, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 169–175, 1999.
[70] B. Han, S. Rho, R. B. Dannenberg, and E. Hwang, “SMERS:
Music emotion recognition using support vector regression,”
in Proc. of the Intl. Society for Music Information Conf.,
Kobe, Japan, 2009.
[71] J.-J. Aucouturier and F. Pachet, “Improving timbre similarity:
How high is the sky?” Journal of Negative Results in Speech
and Audio Sciences, vol. 1, no. 1, 2004.
[72] J. Cohn and G. Katz, “Bimodal expression of emotion by face
and voice,” in ACM Intl. Multimedia Conf., 1998.
[73] L. Silva and P. Ng, “Bimodal emotion recognition,” in Proc.
of the IEEE Intl. Conf. on Automatic Face and Gesture
Recognition, 2000, pp. 332–335.

[55] E. M. Schmidt and Y. E. Kim, “Prediction of time-varying
musical mood distributions from audio,” in Proc. of the Int.
Society for Music Information Conf., Utrecht, Netherlands,
August 2010.

[74] Z. Zeng, M. Pantic, G. Roisman, and T. Huang, “A survey of
affect recognition methods: Audio, visual, and spontaneous
expressions,” in IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, vol. 31, no. 1, 2009, pp. 39–58.

[56] T. Fujishima, “Realtime chord recognition of musical sound:
A system using Common Lisp music.” in Proc. of the Intl.
Computer Music Conf., 1999.

[75] R. Neumayer and A. Rauber, “Integration of text and audio features for genre classification in music information retrieval,” in Proc. of the European Conf. on Information Retrieval, 2007.

[57] G. Tzanetakis and P. Cook, “Musical genre classification of
audio signals,” IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Processing, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 293– 302, 2002.
[58] D. Jiang, L. Lu, H. Zhang, J. Tao, and L. Cai, “Music type
classification by spectral contrast feature,” in Proc. Intl. Conf.
on Multimedia and Expo, vol. 1, 2002, pp. 113–116.
[59] L. Lu, D. Liu, and H. J. Zhang, “Automatic mood detection
and tracking of music audio signals,” IEEE Transactions on
Audio, Speech and Language Processing, vol. 14, no. 1, pp.
5–18, 2006.
[60] T. Li and M. Ogihara, “Detecting emotion in music,” in Proc.
of the Intl. Conf. on Music Information Retrieval, Baltimore,
MD, October 2003.

[76] D. Yang and W. Lee, “Disambiguating music emotion using
software agents,” in Proc. of the Intl. Conf. on Music Information Retrieval. Barcelona, Spain: Universitat Pompeu
Fabra, October 2004.
[77] C. Laurier, J. Grivolla, and P. Herrera, “Multimodal music
mood classification using audio and lyrics,” in Proc. of the
Intl. Conf. on Machine Learning and Applications. Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 2008, pp. 1–6.
[78] X. Hu, J. S. Downie, and A. F. Ehmann, “Lyric text mining
in music mood classification,” in Proc. of the Intl. Society for
Music Information Retrieval Conf., Kobe, Japan, 2009.

[61] M. I. Mandel, G. E. Poliner, and D. P. W. Ellis, “Support vector machine active learning for music retrieval,” Multimedia
Systems, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 3–13, Aug 2006.

[79] B. Schuller, J. Dorfner, and G. Rigoll, “Determination
of nonprototypical valence and arousal in popular music:
Features and performances,” EURASIP Journal on Audio,
Speech, and Music Processing, vol. 2010, pp. 1–20, Jan
2010.

[62] J. Skowronek, M. McKinney, and S. van de Par, “A demonstrator for automatic music mood estimation,” in Proc. Intl.
Conf. on Music Information Retrieval, Vienna, Austria, 2007.

[80] D. Turnbull, L. Barrington, M.Yazdani, and G. Lanckriet,
“Combining audio content and social context for semantic
music discovery,” ACM SIGIR, 2009.

[63] G. Tzanetakis, “Marsyas submissions to MIREX 2007,”
MIREX 2007.

[81] P. Dunker, S. Nowak, A. Begau, and C. Lanz, “Content-based
mood classification for photos and music: A generic multimodal classification framework and evaluation approach,” in
Proc. of the Intl. Conf. on Multimedia Information Retrieval.
ACM, 2008.

[64] G. Peeters, “A generic training and classification system for
MIREX08 classification tasks: Audio music mood, audio
genre, audio artist and audio tag,” MIREX 2008.

266

